README.md, before:

# Table of Contents

<!-- TOC -->

- [Project Title](#project-title)
- [Description](#description)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

<!-- /TOC -->

# Project Title
The MultiLingual Network Analysis Package (mlna)

# Description
This project was funded by the Flex Funds of NFDI4Culture, one of the member consortia of the National Research Data Infrastructure in Germany, in 2024.
It is developed for researchers in the humanities who wish to consult multilingual digital documents for their research, the language of which documents they do not necessarily understand. It allows them to select relevant documents for their research topic from among large digital collections. The intention of developing this package was to integrate digital historical texts in non-European languages into European research and vice versa.

To achieve this goal, the package enables you to visulaize network relations between words and entities that you choose to be extracted from the texts. These network visualizations in turn allow you to see which relations between certain keywords (people, places, technologies, dates, products, events, etc.) are mentioned in the texts that you have at your disposal. Having viewed these relations, you can filter out the texts that thematize a certain relation (an edge in the network graph) or contain a certain word (word in the network graph) and perform close reading on them.

Apart from the mentioned use-case in research, the package can also simply be used for network visualization or basic cleaning of text data.

Besides reading the following content, you can also watch this [video tutorial](https://nfdi4culture.de/) **(placeholder)** to learn how to use mlna. If you want to follow along the video tutorial, you can use the data and jupyter notebook stored in the [material4tutorial](https://github.com/Goli-SF/MLNA/tree/main/material4tutorial) folder.

If you are not familiar with Python and prefer to use the package with an interface, watch the [video tutorial](https://nfdi4culture.de/) **(placeholder)** of the mlna-app on YouTube.

# Installation
In order to use mlna, you need the python version 3.10 or higher. To install the package from Github, run the following command in the terminal:

```pip install git+https://github.com/Goli-SF/MLNA.git```

To install if from PyPI, run:

```pip install mlna```

Make sure to create a virtual environment in your working directory before installing mlna, in order to avoid dependency conflicts. If you plan to use jupyter notebook, install it in your virtual environment before installing mlna to avoid dependency conflicts.

# Usage
You need an internet connection while using mlna, so that the code can reach the API of Google Translate for translating text from other languages to English. Please do not use a VPN while using this package, so that the connection to Google Translate's API is not interrupted.

If you ever see the error message `TypeError: 'NoneType' object is not iterable` while using mlna, it means that the package has not been able to access Google Translate's API due to problems of internet connection or of the API itself. In this case, be patient and keep re-running your code until the error message disappears.

I assume that the user of this package has already a number of machine readable texts in different languages at their disposal, including ones the language of which they do not understand. This package is primarily meant for the user to select out the texts that are relevant to their research topic, without having to translate all of them into the languages that they know and reading them all. Instead, the user can first filter out those text documents that they need from among their collection, using the mlna package. Afterwards, they only have to translate the selected texts into a language that they understand and perform a close reading on them.

To do so, you as the user of mlna can go through the following steps:

1. **Import the modules**

After installing the package, import its modules into your code:

```from mlna import user_input, network```

the preproc module runs in the background of these two modules. If you plan to use it individually for other tasks, you can also run:

```from mlna import preproc```

2. **Prepare text data**

Organize all of the text documents that you plan to work with in a table and convert the table to a pandas dataframe. The mandatory columns in the dataframe are `text_id` and `full_text`. The dataframe may contain as many other columns as you desire. I will call this dataframe `text_df` in the following examples.

3. **Choose entities**

Choose which entities in the texts that you have gathered are relevant to you, using the 'get_entities' function in the 'user_input' module:

```entity_tags = user_input.get_entities()```

This function presents a list of entities to you that the spaCy package can recognize within the texts. Choose as many entities as you want by following the instructions that the function gives you. The function returns a list of entity tags stored in the `entity_tags` variable in this example. These entity tags help you find keywords in the texts stored in `text_df`. The entities that you choose help you get an overview of the content of each text.

4. **Enter user-defined entities**

If there are certain words that are not recognized as one of the entities you have selected, but you want them to be included in text search and network visualization, you can store them in a different variable than `entity_tags` and use it later in the network visualizations. For example, if you are interested in texts dealing with the development of telegraph and telephone, you can store the words 'telegraph' and 'telephone' in a variable called `user_ents`:

```user_ents = ['telegraph', 'telephone']```

5. **Create a dictionary**

In order to extract the entities and words selected by the user from multiligual texts, the mlna package translates all of them into English first. It often happens that proper names from non-English languages are transliterated in English texts and therefore appear with in varied forms in different texts. Also, depending on from which language they are translated to English, they might have different spellings. If this is the case, different spellings of the same entity are recognized by the package as different entities, although they all refer to the same entity. This in turn leads to an invalid representation of network relations between these names and other entities and words selected by the user in the network graph. To correct this, run the `user_dict` function from the `user_input` module. This function not only creates a dictionary that can be used in your script, it also saves that dictionary in a pickled file onto your computer, in the directory of your code. This way, you can always load the dictionary back into your code and add more key-value pairs to it over time. To create a dictionary, run:

```
user_dict = user_input.user_dict (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, dict_path=None, threshold=80)
```

If you have decided to create a list of self-defined entities that are not recognized by the spaCy mode, set `user_ents` in the code above equal to the `user_ents` list that you have created before.

If you give the function a `dict_path`, it will load an existing dictionary and add more key-value-pairs to it. If not, it creates a dictionary from scratch. Either way, the function will prompt you to choose whether you want to see groups of words that could possibly refer to the same entity.

* If you choose 'yes', you are shown these word groups and prompted to add a unified spelling for the words in each group. The package finds these groups using fuzzy matching. Change the value of `threshold` in the above code to change the accuracy of the fuzzy matching.

* If you choose 'no', the function prompts you to create key-value-pairs manually by first entering all different spellings that you find to be refering to the same entity name and then entering a unified spelling for that entity name.

Make sure that you run the `user_dict` function a couple of times on the text dataframe. The reason is this: If you for example have the words 'Naser' and 'Naser al Din Qajar' and want to replace both of them with 'Nasser-al-Din Shah', the function will do the following replacements:

Naser --> Nasser-al-Din Shah

Naser al Din Qajar --> Nasser-al-Din Shah

Now imagine that the package has also detected 'Naser al Din' as an entitiy, but you have forgotten to pass is as one of the keys of the value 'Nasser-al-Din Shah' in the previous step. In this case, the dictionary only replaces the 'Naser' part of this name with 'Nasser-al-Din Shah', therefore turning the original entity into 'Nasser-al-Din Shah al Din' which makes no sense. If you spot such mistakes in the visualized network graph, run the dictionary again and add the key-value pair `'Nasser-al-Din Shah al Din': 'Nasser-al-Din Shah'` to it. You can repeat this process as many times as necessary, making sure that you have unified the spellings of all the different variations of the same entity name.

6. **Visualize communities**

If you want to view the communities that exist within the collection of entities from `entitiy_tags` and words that you have previously stored in `user_ents`, run the `detect_community` function from the `network` module:

```
network.detect_community (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, title='community_detection', figsize=(1000, 700), bgcolor='black', font_color='white')
```

This function returns a community visualization stored in your code's path as a file named 'community_detection.html'. Open this file, interact with the community graph and see which relationships exist between differnet nodes consisiting of the extracted entities and the entities defined by the user. You can change the title of the .html file, its size, and the colors of its font and background in the function.

The `detect_community` function looks at all the texts you have stored in the 'text_df' dataframe.

If you notice wrong or double spellings of a certain word or entity name and want to change them, run the `user_dict` function again and complement your personalized user dictionary accordingly.

7. **Visualize network relations**

If you wish to visualize network relations that exist within the collection of entities from `entitiy_tags` (and maybe aso the words that you have stored in `user_ents`), run the `visualize_network` function and change the values of `user_ents` and `user_dict` if they are not None:

```
netowrk.visualize_network (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, core=False, select_nodes=None, sources=None, title='network_visualization', figsize=(1000, 700), bgcolor='black', font_color='white')
```

This function returns a network graph stored in your code's path as `network_visualization.html`. Open this file, interact with the network graph and see which relationships exist between differnet nodes consisiting of the extracted entities and your selected words. Each relationship (edge) displayed here represent the co-occurence of its nodes in one sentence in the texts in `text_df`. You can change the title of the .html file, its size, and the colors of its font and background in the function.

If you notice wrong or double spellings of a certain word or entity name and want to change them, run the `user_dict` function again and complement your personalized user dictionary accordingly.

If you only wish to view the core of the network, set `core=True`.If you only wish to visualize a network consisting of a certain group of nodes, store these nodes as a list in `select_nodes`. If you want to make sure that the nodes you include in the `select_nodes` list actually exist in the network dataframe, generate the `select_nodes` list using a function of the same name from the `user_input` module:

```
select_nodes = user_input.select_nodes (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None)
```

If you only want to use certain texts from `text_df` for visualizing the network graph, store the `text_id`s of these texts in the `sources` list.

8. **Select relevant texts**

Having studied the network and community graphs, you have gained a general overview of the subjects and corelations that you could find in the collection of texts. Now is the time to figure out which nodes and edges (which entities and which relations between them) appear in which ones of the texts in the collection. To do so, run the `filter_network_data` function from the `network` module:

```
filtered_df = network.filter_network_data (text_df, select_nodes, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, operator='OR')
```

The argument `select_nodes` stores a list of nodes that you are interested in and want to spot in `text_df`. If you want to make sure that the nodes you include in the `select_nodes` list actually exist in the network dataframe, generate the `select_nodes` list using a function of the same name from the `user_input` module:

```
select_nodes = user_input.select_nodes (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None)
```

This function prompts you the enter the names of the nodes one by one and it will tell you if a certain node is not contained within your dataset.

If you are interested in one or more nodes, set `operator=OR`. If you are only interested in one edge, namely in the cooccurance of two nodes, `select_nodes` should contain only these two nodes and you should set `operator=AND`.

The output of this function is a dataframe containing columns from your original dataframe plus three extra columns containg network data: `source` and `target` which include one or both of your selected nodes (depending on whether you chose 'AND' or 'OR' as the operator) as well as `weight` which tells you how many times a certain cooccurance appears in each text.

You can now select the texts displayed in `filtered_df` and perform a close reading of them, knowing that they very likely contain information that is relevant to your research.

# Contributing

Contributions to the package, including bug fixes and new features, are welcome. When contributing to this repository, please first discuss the change you wish to make via a GitHub issue or email me before making a change.

# License
mlna has a CC BY-NC 4.0 license. For more detail, see the LICENSE.md file. For the third-party licenses of other packages used for the development of mlna, see the THIRD_PARTY_LICENSES.md file.

Commit message:

add google trans error messages to readme

README.md, after:

# Table of Contents

<!-- TOC -->

- [Project Title](#project-title)
- [Description](#description)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

<!-- /TOC -->

# Project Title
The MultiLingual Network Analysis Package (mlna)

# Description
This project was funded by the Flex Funds of NFDI4Culture, one of the member consortia of the National Research Data Infrastructure in Germany, in 2024.
It is developed for researchers in the humanities who wish to consult multilingual digital documents for their research, the language of which documents they do not necessarily understand. It allows them to select relevant documents for their research topic from among large digital collections. The intention of developing this package was to integrate digital historical texts in non-European languages into European research and vice versa.

To achieve this goal, the package enables you to visulaize network relations between words and entities that you choose to be extracted from the texts. These network visualizations in turn allow you to see which relations between certain keywords (people, places, technologies, dates, products, events, etc.) are mentioned in the texts that you have at your disposal. Having viewed these relations, you can filter out the texts that thematize a certain relation (an edge in the network graph) or contain a certain word (word in the network graph) and perform close reading on them.

Apart from the mentioned use-case in research, the package can also simply be used for network visualization or basic cleaning of text data.

Besides reading the following content, you can also watch this [video tutorial](https://nfdi4culture.de/) **(placeholder)** to learn how to use mlna. If you want to follow along the video tutorial, you can use the data and jupyter notebook stored in the [material4tutorial](https://github.com/Goli-SF/MLNA/tree/main/material4tutorial) folder.

If you are not familiar with Python and prefer to use the package with an interface, watch the [video tutorial](https://nfdi4culture.de/) **(placeholder)** of the mlna-app on YouTube.

# Installation
In order to use mlna, you need the python version 3.10 or higher. To install the package from Github, run the following command in the terminal:

```pip install git+https://github.com/Goli-SF/MLNA.git```

To install if from PyPI, run:

```pip install mlna```

Make sure to create a virtual environment in your working directory before installing mlna, in order to avoid dependency conflicts. If you plan to use jupyter notebook, install it in your virtual environment before installing mlna to avoid dependency conflicts.

# Usage
You need an internet connection while using mlna, so that the code can reach the API of Google Translate for translating text from other languages to English. Please do not use a VPN while using this package, so that the connection to Google Translate's API is not interrupted.

If you ever see the error messages `TypeError: 'NoneType' object is not iterable` or `TypeError: the JSON object must be str, bytes or bytearray, not NoneType` while using mlna, it means that the package has not been able to access Google Translate's API due to problems of internet connection or of the API itself. In this case, be patient and keep re-running your code until the error message disappears.

I assume that the user of this package has already a number of machine readable texts in different languages at their disposal, including ones the language of which they do not understand. This package is primarily meant for the user to select out the texts that are relevant to their research topic, without having to translate all of them into the languages that they know and reading them all. Instead, the user can first filter out those text documents that they need from among their collection, using the mlna package. Afterwards, they only have to translate the selected texts into a language that they understand and perform a close reading on them.

To do so, you as the user of mlna can go through the following steps:

1. **Import the modules**

After installing the package, import its modules into your code:

```from mlna import user_input, network```

the preproc module runs in the background of these two modules. If you plan to use it individually for other tasks, you can also run:

```from mlna import preproc```

2. **Prepare text data**

Organize all of the text documents that you plan to work with in a table and convert the table to a pandas dataframe. The mandatory columns in the dataframe are `text_id` and `full_text`. The dataframe may contain as many other columns as you desire. I will call this dataframe `text_df` in the following examples.

3. **Choose entities**

Choose which entities in the texts that you have gathered are relevant to you, using the 'get_entities' function in the 'user_input' module:

```entity_tags = user_input.get_entities()```

This function presents a list of entities to you that the spaCy package can recognize within the texts. Choose as many entities as you want by following the instructions that the function gives you. The function returns a list of entity tags stored in the `entity_tags` variable in this example. These entity tags help you find keywords in the texts stored in `text_df`. The entities that you choose help you get an overview of the content of each text.

4. **Enter user-defined entities**

If there are certain words that are not recognized as one of the entities you have selected, but you want them to be included in text search and network visualization, you can store them in a different variable than `entity_tags` and use it later in the network visualizations. For example, if you are interested in texts dealing with the development of telegraph and telephone, you can store the words 'telegraph' and 'telephone' in a variable called `user_ents`:

```user_ents = ['telegraph', 'telephone']```

5. **Create a dictionary**

In order to extract the entities and words selected by the user from multiligual texts, the mlna package translates all of them into English first. It often happens that proper names from non-English languages are transliterated in English texts and therefore appear with in varied forms in different texts. Also, depending on from which language they are translated to English, they might have different spellings. If this is the case, different spellings of the same entity are recognized by the package as different entities, although they all refer to the same entity. This in turn leads to an invalid representation of network relations between these names and other entities and words selected by the user in the network graph. To correct this, run the `user_dict` function from the `user_input` module. This function not only creates a dictionary that can be used in your script, it also saves that dictionary in a pickled file onto your computer, in the directory of your code. This way, you can always load the dictionary back into your code and add more key-value pairs to it over time. To create a dictionary, run:

```
user_dict = user_input.user_dict (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, dict_path=None, threshold=80)
```

If you have decided to create a list of self-defined entities that are not recognized by the spaCy mode, set `user_ents` in the code above equal to the `user_ents` list that you have created before.

If you give the function a `dict_path`, it will load an existing dictionary and add more key-value-pairs to it. If not, it creates a dictionary from scratch. Either way, the function will prompt you to choose whether you want to see groups of words that could possibly refer to the same entity.

* If you choose 'yes', you are shown these word groups and prompted to add a unified spelling for the words in each group. The package finds these groups using fuzzy matching. Change the value of `threshold` in the above code to change the accuracy of the fuzzy matching.

* If you choose 'no', the function prompts you to create key-value-pairs manually by first entering all different spellings that you find to be refering to the same entity name and then entering a unified spelling for that entity name.

Make sure that you run the `user_dict` function a couple of times on the text dataframe. The reason is this: If you for example have the words 'Naser' and 'Naser al Din Qajar' and want to replace both of them with 'Nasser-al-Din Shah', the function will do the following replacements:

Naser --> Nasser-al-Din Shah

Naser al Din Qajar --> Nasser-al-Din Shah

Now imagine that the package has also detected 'Naser al Din' as an entitiy, but you have forgotten to pass is as one of the keys of the value 'Nasser-al-Din Shah' in the previous step. In this case, the dictionary only replaces the 'Naser' part of this name with 'Nasser-al-Din Shah', therefore turning the original entity into 'Nasser-al-Din Shah al Din' which makes no sense. If you spot such mistakes in the visualized network graph, run the dictionary again and add the key-value pair `'Nasser-al-Din Shah al Din': 'Nasser-al-Din Shah'` to it. You can repeat this process as many times as necessary, making sure that you have unified the spellings of all the different variations of the same entity name.

6. **Visualize communities**

If you want to view the communities that exist within the collection of entities from `entitiy_tags` and words that you have previously stored in `user_ents`, run the `detect_community` function from the `network` module:

```
network.detect_community (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, title='community_detection', figsize=(1000, 700), bgcolor='black', font_color='white')
```

This function returns a community visualization stored in your code's path as a file named 'community_detection.html'. Open this file, interact with the community graph and see which relationships exist between differnet nodes consisiting of the extracted entities and the entities defined by the user. You can change the title of the .html file, its size, and the colors of its font and background in the function.

The `detect_community` function looks at all the texts you have stored in the 'text_df' dataframe.

If you notice wrong or double spellings of a certain word or entity name and want to change them, run the `user_dict` function again and complement your personalized user dictionary accordingly.

7. **Visualize network relations**

If you wish to visualize network relations that exist within the collection of entities from `entitiy_tags` (and maybe aso the words that you have stored in `user_ents`), run the `visualize_network` function and change the values of `user_ents` and `user_dict` if they are not None:

```
netowrk.visualize_network (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, core=False, select_nodes=None, sources=None, title='network_visualization', figsize=(1000, 700), bgcolor='black', font_color='white')
```

This function returns a network graph stored in your code's path as `network_visualization.html`. Open this file, interact with the network graph and see which relationships exist between differnet nodes consisiting of the extracted entities and your selected words. Each relationship (edge) displayed here represent the co-occurence of its nodes in one sentence in the texts in `text_df`. You can change the title of the .html file, its size, and the colors of its font and background in the function.

If you notice wrong or double spellings of a certain word or entity name and want to change them, run the `user_dict` function again and complement your personalized user dictionary accordingly.

If you only wish to view the core of the network, set `core=True`.If you only wish to visualize a network consisting of a certain group of nodes, store these nodes as a list in `select_nodes`. If you want to make sure that the nodes you include in the `select_nodes` list actually exist in the network dataframe, generate the `select_nodes` list using a function of the same name from the `user_input` module:

```
select_nodes = user_input.select_nodes (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None)
```

If you only want to use certain texts from `text_df` for visualizing the network graph, store the `text_id`s of these texts in the `sources` list.

8. **Select relevant texts**

Having studied the network and community graphs, you have gained a general overview of the subjects and corelations that you could find in the collection of texts. Now is the time to figure out which nodes and edges (which entities and which relations between them) appear in which ones of the texts in the collection. To do so, run the `filter_network_data` function from the `network` module:

```
filtered_df = network.filter_network_data (text_df, select_nodes, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None, operator='OR')
```

The argument `select_nodes` stores a list of nodes that you are interested in and want to spot in `text_df`. If you want to make sure that the nodes you include in the `select_nodes` list actually exist in the network dataframe, generate the `select_nodes` list using a function of the same name from the `user_input` module:

```
select_nodes = user_input.select_nodes (text_df, entity_tags, user_ents=None, user_dict=None)
```

This function prompts you the enter the names of the nodes one by one and it will tell you if a certain node is not contained within your dataset.

If you are interested in one or more nodes, set `operator=OR`. If you are only interested in one edge, namely in the cooccurance of two nodes, `select_nodes` should contain only these two nodes and you should set `operator=AND`.

The output of this function is a dataframe containing columns from your original dataframe plus three extra columns containg network data: `source` and `target` which include one or both of your selected nodes (depending on whether you chose 'AND' or 'OR' as the operator) as well as `weight` which tells you how many times a certain cooccurance appears in each text.

You can now select the texts displayed in `filtered_df` and perform a close reading of them, knowing that they very likely contain information that is relevant to your research.

# Contributing

Contributions to the package, including bug fixes and new features, are welcome. When contributing to this repository, please first discuss the change you wish to make via a GitHub issue or email me before making a change.

# License
mlna has a CC BY-NC 4.0 license. For more detail, see the LICENSE.md file. For the third-party licenses of other packages used for the development of mlna, see the THIRD_PARTY_LICENSES.md file.
